A Belgian
diamond expert Filip van Laere, who advised Harare on ensuring compliance with
the Kimberley Process (KP) said in September 2010 that diamond output from
Marange fields were expected to reach 40 million carats by 2013, helping the
country generate about $2 billion in revenue per year. "Zimbabwe
has been propelled to the number one spot as the world's most important player
and it will be number three in value,” he was quoted as saying at the time by
Reuters. Van
Laere even richly said that Zimbabwe could outshine leading diamond producers
like Russia, Botswana and South Africa. Dear
reader, I am sure you probably fell off your chair laughing as you read the
aforementioned lavish projection. Looking
at the predictions in hindsight makes one wonder if these were made under the
influence. Clearly
under the hex of such toxic advise, the then mines minister Obert Mpofu
announced boldly to the world that Zimbabwe was poised to earn $2 billion per
annum from its diamonds in Marange and would never beg anyone for help. “We
are going to unleash our worthiness to the world. Zimbabwe won’t be begging to
anyone,” he said after the lifting of the KP embargo. "Our
current diamond production is estimated by volume, to be in excess of 25
percent of the world production, and going by the values realised to date per
carat, Zimbabwe is set to earn in excess of $2 billion annually in gross
revenues." Chaim
Even-Zohar, president of the Tel Aviv-based diamond consulting service, Tacy
also said in November 2012 when I sat down with him in Victoria Falls that
Zimbabwe had the potential to produce eight to 10 percent of the global gem
production. Some
unnamed geologists cited by a local Member of Parliament, Eddie Cross, who
claimed to have done a thorough research on Marange, reported that the fields
contained between 2 and 7 billion carats of raw diamonds. Not
to be outdone, Charles Stanley Securities of the UK said in February 2012 that
Zimbabwe’s “huge” diamond reserves were set to “shape” the global diamond
industry over the next few years. Kieron
Hodgson, a commodities analyst with a UK securities firm, was quoted by New
Ziana news agency as saying that although the exact resource base of the
Marange diamond fields remained unknown, official figures pegged it between 60
000 and 70 000 hectares. “Zimbabwe
really does have the potential to upset the applecart,” he said at the time. Hodgson
said the southern African country was also expected to produce between two and
three million carats per month at peak for around 20 years. ‘Failure’ However,
Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe said recently that diamond mining in the
country had ‘failed’. “Diamonds
are a failure,” he was quoted as saying recently to a group of former freedom
fighters. This
tacit admission of ‘failure’, in what some say was a massive plunder of the
country’s diamonds, makes a sad reading. Mugabe
claimed earlier this year that illicit trade in Zimbabwean diamonds cost the
economy more than $13 billion, forcing the state to create a new company, the
Zimbabwe Consolidated Diamond Company. He
said without providing a timeframe that the state had earned about $2 billion
from gems worth about $15 billion that were generated by the industry. “Lots
of smuggling and swindling has taken place and the companies that have been
mining, I want to say robbed us of our wealth,” Mugabe told a state television
station. “That
is why we decided that this area should be a monopoly area and only the state
should be able to do the mining in that area.” Mugabe’s
admission of the pillaging of Marange diamonds left many a people livid as they
had hoped that the gems would help resuscitate the comatose economy.  So
what caused this epic ‘failure’ in Marange? Firstly,
revenue was salted away, while state coffers remained largely dry. No
efforts were made to invest in machinery for underground mining, unlike the
alluvial mining they were involved in that is not capital intensive. The
mining companies often clashed with the then finance minister in the unity
government, Tendai Biti, over the diamond revenue. Strangely
officials from Mugabe’s party appeared to side with the mining companies, only
to start complaining of truncated diamond revenue when they took control of the
government after the 2013 elections. Secondly,
the country allowed too many companies, some of them fly-by-night, to mine in
Marange, making it a fertile ground for looting. There
were eight miners in Marange, including Anjin Investments, Diamond Mining
Company, Jinan, Kusena, Marange Resources and Mbada Diamonds. Thirdly,
the trade embargo by KP and sanctions imposed by the U.S and EU didn’t help
matters, as officials often threw a blanket over diamond mining in the country
and revenue accrued in fear of sanctions. This
promoted nocturnal diamond dealings and smuggling. However,
having noted these factors, it’s not far-fetched to say that there is still
hope. With
political will, right policies, exploration and reputable mining companies (in
partnership with the state as is the case in Angola, Botswana and Namibia)
willing to go underground, something can be salvaged from this mess.